APEX (Asynchronous Program EXecution) design (#24127)
solana-labs/solana: docs/src/proposals/ape.md

> == Asynchronous Program Execution == 

Reviewer: would be helpful for me + others to elaborate on what problem this solves.

Execution of state for fork choice can run asynchronously w.r.t program execution and computing the BankHash.

=== Isolation domains ===

> Accounts include an additional field, the isolation domain. Currently only two domains exist. 

Reviewer: there are 4 listed below :)

* 1 - the default domain where all things live
* 2 - the Vote Program 
* 3 - moving 2 to 1
* 4 - moving 1 to 2

==== IsolationProgram ====

This program id is used to identify accounts with lamports and data that can move domains.

* IsolationProgram::Withdraw

remove lamports

* IsolationProgram::WriteData

write the data

* IsolationProgram::MoveDomains(1 or 2)

Allows an isolation account to move domains. 

* SystemProgram::CreateVoteAccountFromIsolatedAccount

Allow the system program to consume a IsolationProgram account in domain 2 to become a VoteProgram account.

=== Execution ===

A transaction cannot write to a domain while reading any other domain.  Any transaction that attempt to do so fails. The Vote program is isolated such that any transactions that writes to a VoteProgram account can only read from VoteProgram domain, otherwise the transaction fails.

=== Replay ===

Replay of banks is split up into 2 modes ForkHash and BankHash.

=== ForkHash ===

> Computing the ForkHash only evalutes the VoteProgram instructions.  Transactions that include VoteProgram and any non VoteProgram accounts fail immediatly and are ignored.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Computing the ForkHash only evaluates the VoteProgram instructions.  Transactions that include VoteProgram and any non VoteProgram accounts fail immediately and are ignored.
```

=== BankHash ===

> Computing the BankHash evalutes all the non VoteProgram instructions. Transactions that include VoteProgram and any non VoteProgram accounts fail immediatly and are ignored.  The LS computation and finalizing the IsolationProgram::MoveDomains are done at the epoch boundary for the N+1 epoch.  The BankHash computation must not fall behind the ForkHash by more then 1 epoch or the cluster will halt.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Computing the BankHash evaluates all the non VoteProgram instructions. Transactions that include VoteProgram and any non VoteProgram accounts fail immediately and are ignored.  The LS computation and finalizing the IsolationProgram::MoveDomains are done at the epoch boundary for the N+1 epoch.  The BankHash computation must not fall behind the ForkHash by more than 1 epoch or the cluster will halt.
```

=== VoteProgram::Vote ===

The Vote instruction contains ForkHashes only. BankHash computation is done outside of the root that consensus validators vote on. Consider mixing in the epoch snapshot hash into PoH once an epoch, and nodes should continue to gossip snapshot hashes continuously to ensure they are not experiencing an inconsistency failure.

=== Invalid Fee Payers ===

> Transactions that fail due to fee payers unable to pay for the execution are ignored.  This means that leaders could stuff blocks with invalid transactions up to the known compute limit.

Reviewer: "This means that leaders could stuff blocks with invalid transactions up to the known compute limit"

if invalid txs, what is compute limit then? does this become more about "block size" in the literal sense on size of the block (sum of all serialized versioned txs payloads plus metadata?)

== Asynchronous Program Execution ==

Execution of state for fork choice can run asynchronously w.r.t
program execution and computing the BankHash. Prior to this change,
selecting a fork and voting on it required full evaluation of all
the transactions in the bank. With this change only the VoteProgram
is evaluated.

=== Isolation domains ===

To split the VoteProgram apart from the rest of the bank, the runtime
tracks which accounts belong to which isolation domain. A transaction
cannot read accounts from multiple domains in the same transaction,
any transaction that does so aborts.

VoteProgram accounts are isolated in their own domain. Accounts
have a special system instruction that allows them to move between
domains. The move is finalized at the end of the next epoch.

AccountMeta domain fields;

* domain - The isolation domain.

* activation epoch - The epoch when this account is active in the
domain.

The isolation domain. Currently only two domains exist:

> * 0 - The default domain where all things live

Reviewer 3: Ring 0 is
